Add 'styling with css' chapter (#11)
melange-re/melange-for-react-devs: docs/styling-with-css/index.md

# Styling with CSS

The restaurant website's order confirmation widget is far from complete, but
Madame Jellobutter insists that you make the widget less ugly before you do
anything else. In previous chapters, we saw how to add styles using the `style`
prop, but let's see how to do it with good old CSS.

## Update webpack config

In order to use CSS from our ReasonReact components, we'll install the
`style-loader` and `css-loader` webpack plugins[^1]:

```
npm install --save-dev css-loader style-loader
```

Add a new rule to `webpack.config.js` so that these plugins will be applied to
your `.css` files:

```javascript{5-12}
module.exports = {
  devServer: {
    historyApiFallback: true,
  },
  module: {
    rules: [
      {
        test: /\.css$/i,
        use: ["style-loader", "css-loader"],
      },
    ],
  },
};
```

## Add the first CSS file

Add a new file

> `src/order-confirmation/order-item.css` and give it these styles:

Author: I advise the reader to just continue adding code to the same directory as last chapter

<!-- This file gets renamed to order-item.module.css later -->
<<< @/../src/styling-with-css/order-item.module.css

## Import using `mel.raw`

In OCaml, there is no syntax to import from files, because all modules within a
project are visible to all other modules[^2]. However, we can make use of
JavaScript's `import` syntax by using the [mel.raw extension
node](https://melange.re/v2.1.0/communicate-with-javascript/#generate-raw-javascript),
which allows us to embed raw JavaScript in our OCaml code. Add the following
line to the top of `Order.re`:

```reason
[%%mel.raw {|import "./order-item.css"|}];
```

The `{||}` string doesn't require you to escape characters like double-quote and

> newline. They are similar to the `{js||js}` strings we first saw in the [Celsius

Reviewer: Maybe we can refer to their name (quoted strings) and the OCaml docs: https://v2.ocaml.org/manual/lex.html#sss:stringliterals
```suggestion
The `{||}` string literals are called [quoted strings](https://v2.ocaml.org/manual/lex.html#sss:stringliterals),
and they are useful to represent strings of arbitrary content without escaping.
They are similar to the `{js||js}` strings we first saw in the [Celsius
```

Author: Add reference to quoted string literal and link to OCaml docs: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/c6a2a808010f38b6b9122f9a62c063cbe113d739

Converter](/celsius-converter-exception/#solutions) chapter, with the
difference that they won't handle Unicode correctly.

Unfortunately, in the terminal where we're running `make serve`, we see this
webpack compilation error:

```
ERROR in ./_build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation/Order.js 7:0-8:1
Module not found: Error: Can't resolve './order-item.css' in '~/melange-for-react-devs/_build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation'
```

## Tell Dune to copy CSS files

> The problem is that webpack is serving the app from the build directory at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem is that Webpack is serving the app from the build directory at
```

Author: Capitalize Webpack everywhere in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/c37c8535050b139fdcde2f3777cd6a9e3410069c

`_build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation`, and the

> `order-item.css` file isn't in the build directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`order-item.css` file isn't in that directory.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/325f86b433f12d91ba563454877d527088daaf94

To solve this, we can add the [runtime_deps
field](https://melange.re/v2.1.0/build-system/#handling-assets) to our
`melange.emit` stanza in `src/order-confirmation/dune`:

```clj{7}
(melange.emit
 (target output)
 (libraries reason-react)
 (preprocess
  (pps melange.ppx reason-react-ppx))
 (module_systems es6)
 (runtime_deps order-item.css))
```

We also want to add styles for the `Order` component, so add a new file
`src/order-confirmation/order.css` with these styles:

<!-- This file gets renamed to order.module.css later -->
<<< @/../src/styling-with-css/order.module.css

To ensure that `order.css` is also copied to the build directory, we can add
`order.css` to the value of `runtime_deps`:

```clj
(runtime_deps item.css order.css)
```

If you have many `.css` files, you can just tell `runtime_deps` to copy all

> `.css` files over:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`.css` files over using Dune's `glob_files` configuration:
```

Author: Added extra clause in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/be65905036c807cdfc955ac3c0d8bcd419d5846b

```clj
(runtime_deps (glob_files *.css))
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The different options for globs are listed in the [Dune documentation](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/concepts/dependency-spec.html#glob).

```

Author: Added link to glob docs in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/be65905036c807cdfc955ac3c0d8bcd419d5846b

## Add classes to JSX

Now we can add the appropriate classes to `OrderItem.make`'s JSX:

<<< Order.re#order-item{4-6}

As well as `Order.make`'s JSX:

<<< Order.re#make{6,13}

Finally, add a `mel.raw` extension node at the top of `Order.re`:

```reason
[%%mel.raw {|import "./order.css"|}];
```

## Problems with `mel.raw`

This solution works well for our current build configuration, but falls apart if
we change the `module_systems` field of the `melange.emit` stanza from `es6` to

> `commonjs`. This results in a subtle runtime error caused by the fact

Author: I'm a bit surprised it's a runtime error instead of a compilation error in webpack. Should we look more into this?

Reviewer: I wouldn't look more into it... JavaScript modules are a can of worms.

that CommonJS uses `require` instead of `import` to import modules.

> Another issue is that you can't easily use `mel.raw` extension nodes in

Author: It turns out that Melange allows you to put `%%mel.raw` inside a submodule, but refmt will always reformat it to `%mel.raw` in this case, which causes a compilation error in webpack. Not sure if I should include more detail about that here.

Author: Removed this line in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/9d3d27b26175f0253bd75aa88ff2d79972546455. It's probably already fixed in refmt.

Fortunately, Melange provides an official and more reliable way to import
frontend assets.

## Import using `external`

At the top of `Order.re`, replace our first `mel.raw` extension node with an
[external](https://melange.re/v2.2.0/communicate-with-javascript/#external-functions)
declaration:

```reason
[%%mel.raw {|import "./order-item.css"|}]; // [!code --]
[@mel.module "./order-item.css"] external _css: unit = "default"; // [!code ++]
```

This essentially tells OCaml to assign the default export of the
`order-item.css` module to the variable `_css`. The generated JavaScript looks
like this:

```javascript
import OrderItemCss from "./order-item.css";
var _css;
```

Let's break down the individual parts of the `external` declaration:

```reason
[@mel.module "./order-item.css"] external _css: unit = "default";
```

- [mel.module](https://melange.re/v2.2.0/communicate-with-javascript/#using-functions-from-other-javascript-modules)
  is an
  [attribute](https://melange.re/v2.2.0/communicate-with-javascript/#attributes)
  that tells the `external` declaration which module to import from
- The `external` keyword tells OCaml this is a declaration for a value defined

>   outside of OCaml, i.e. it comes from JavaScript

Reviewer: Not sure if it's worth drawing the analogy with OCaml native, e.g.:

```suggestion
- The `external` keyword tells OCaml this is a declaration for a value defined
  outside of OCaml, i.e. in native, the externals will reference C values, in Melange
  they reference JavaScript values
```

Author: Added a footnote about external in native OCaml: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/ddd7c0b4cc89fbfda8dd96e7033f917230d71607

CSS module. Then change the corresponding `external` declaration:

```reason
[@mel.module "./order-item.css"] external _css: unit = "default"; // [!code --]
[@mel.module "./order-item.module.css"] external css: Js.t({..}) = "default"; // [!code ++]
```

There are three changes of note:

- We change the payload of the `mel.module` attribute to
  `./order-item.module.css` to reflect the new name of the file
- We rename the `_css` variable to `css`, since we intend to use the variable
  later
- We change the type of `css` from `unit` to `Js.t({..})`[^3]

If you look at your compiled app in the browser right now, you'll see that this
change breaks the styles, because the classes defined in `order-item.module.css`
can no longer be accessed by the names we originally gave them. To access the
locally-scoped classes, we must refactor the `OrderItem` component so that it
accesses the class names through the `css` variable:

<<< Order.re#order-item-css{7-9}

Recall that `##` is the access operator for `Js.t` objects, so
`className=css##item` is equivalent to `className={css.item}` in JavaScript.
Note that we also moved the `external` declaration for `./order-item.module.css`

> inside the `OrderComponent` module[^4], since that's the only place it's used.

Reviewer: For some reason, this link to ^4 doesn't render ok:

<img width="252" alt="image" src="https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/assets/220424/8db08c55-e0db-47dc-8d5a-1ab1e56b0d66">

Author: Removed outdated footnote reference in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/commit/c6a2a808010f38b6b9122f9a62c063cbe113d739

## Exercises

<b>1.</b> Extension nodes like `mel.raw` can also be prefixed with `%` instead
of `%%`. What happens if you replace `%%mel.raw` with `%mel.raw`?

<b>2.</b> Refactor the `Order` component so that it also uses an `external`
declaration instead of `mel.raw`.

<b>3.</b> Replace your usage of `mel.module` with `bs.module`. What happens?

## Overview

- The `mel.raw` extension node embeds raw JavaScript inside OCaml code. Use with
  caution.
- The `runtime_deps` field of `melange.emit` copies assets like `.css` files to
  the build directory.
- `external` declarations are used to import CSS or JS files.

## Solutions

<b>1.</b> Change the `%%mel.raw` to `%mel.raw` will cause a compile error in
webpack because the generated JS code changes to

```
((import "./order.css"));
```

which isn't valid JavaScript syntax. Changing it back to `%%mel.raw` will
produce syntactically valid JS:

```javascript
import "./order.css"
;
```

The general rule is that you should use `%%mel.raw` for statements, and
`%mel.raw` for expressions.

<b>2.</b> After you refactor the `Order` component to use an `external`
declaration, it should look something like this:

<<< Order.re#order-external

> <b>3.</b> If you replace `mel.modlue` with `bs.module`, your code will continue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<b>3.</b> If you replace `mel.module` with `bs.module`, your code will continue
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/325f86b433f12d91ba563454877d527088daaf94

> to compile but you get a morning from Melange:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to compile but you get a warning from Melange:
```

I guess you wrote this in the morning? 😄

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/325f86b433f12d91ba563454877d527088daaf94

```
File "src/styling-with-css/Order.re", line 4, characters 4-13:
Alert deprecated: The `[@bs.*]' attributes are deprecated and will be removed in the

> next release.

Reviewer: We will have to remember to revisit this part once Melange 3 is out, because there won't be a warning at all. Maybe worth creating an issue to track it?

Author: I created an issue for all the changes we need to make once Melange 3 comes out: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/issues/12

To ensure that `order.css` is also copied to the build directory, we can add
`order.css` to the value of `runtime_deps`:

```clj
(runtime_deps item.css order.css)
```

If you have many `.css` files, you can tell `runtime_deps` to copy all `.css`
files over using Dune's `glob_files` configuration:

```clj
(runtime_deps (glob_files *.css))
```

Check the Dune documentation for the [different options for
globs](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/concepts/dependency-spec.html#glob).

## Add classes to JSX

Now we can add the appropriate classes to `OrderItem.make`'s JSX:

<<< Order.re#order-item{4-6}

As well as `Order.make`'s JSX:

<<< Order.re#order-make{6,13}

Finally, add a `mel.raw` extension node at the top of `Order.re`:

```reason
[%%mel.raw {|import "./order.css"|}];
```

## Problems with `mel.raw`

This solution works well for our current build configuration, but falls apart if
we change the `module_systems` field of the `melange.emit` stanza from `es6` to
`commonjs`. This results in a subtle runtime error caused by the fact
that CommonJS uses `require` instead of `import` to import modules.

The `mel.raw` extension node is unsafe, but it is still useful for prototyping.

> Fortunately, Melange provides an official and more reliable way to import
> frontend assets.

Reviewer: I am not sure if adding "official" adds any useful information, it also reminds me of old times, with lots of official mandates 😬 ... Suggested change:

```suggestion
Fortunately, Melange provides a more reliable way to import frontend assets.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/11/commits/41945e168d77043f0b9aebb155e7e9a95e90d5a6

> frontend assets.

Reviewer: Also, not sure if we should elaborate more. `external` is not strictly to import frontend assets, but more generically, allows to interact between OCaml code and any piece of existing JavaScript code 🤔 

Edit: oh, I see it's mentioned below:

https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/blob/096fb4c897d36c853ee6bb75715e1a47dae8c85e/docs/styling-with-css/index.md?plain=1#L228-L231
